i was numb i'd gone into freeze mode i
was manic i was depressed i was stuck
all at the same time and it was just
this kind of frozenness
and i was i was lying on my bedroom
floor facing one of those mirrored
cupboard doors and
i could hear the kids upstairs
you know going to school and i could
hear all the normal sounds of daily life
and i
was ready to check out i was
i was ready to die
and it's really calm about it and um
and i looked at myself in the mirror and
i couldn't see myself
like it was like this emptiness
and then this thought just dropped into
my head and it just said what if you
just kind of started again with just the
clothes on your back and did it your way
no one to bother you no one cares no
judgment because hey you're willing to
let go of everything so why not just
start with what you've what you've got
just here and let's see what happens and
that notion of an experiment let's see
what happens um became my motto for the
next kind of let's say well 10 years
hey everyone welcome to health theory
today's guest is sarah wilson she's a
multiple time new york times
best-selling author who was named one of
the 200 most influential authors in the
world two years running she also hosted
the first season of masterchef australia
helping it to smash records and become
one of the most watched seasons of any
show in australian history as a
passionate philanthropist she donated
all of the profits from her thriving i
quit sugar initiative and now she has
dedicated herself to the tireless
mission of helping to improve the health
and mental health of people the world
over a commitment that has earned her a
passionate audience that measures in the
millions and sir the thing that i found
most interesting about your journey is
the the sort of hard right from
or what may seem like a hard right from
talking about sugar all this sort of
bodily health stuff and then getting
into anxiety with first we make must
make the beast beautiful a it's an
amazing concept super fascinating walk
me through
what is the beast and how do we make it
beautiful and how did it come out of
sugar yes exactly um so the beast uh is
essentially anxiety and we have grown up
you know our generation
various generations around us have grown
up with this notion that anxiety is a
disorder it's a problem
we've grown up with this idea that
anxiety is something we should shut down
we should tame we should uh really
eliminate um
and
i've got bipolar when i say i've got
bipolar i've been diagnosed with bipolar
through the general dsm kind of you know
format and uh obsessive compulsive
disorder and have had general anxiety
since the age of 11. um so i've had to
grapple with this idea that you know
i've got some kind of disease or
disorder so i decided i was going to go
off and try to investigate if there was
another lens that i could see it through
and i'd been grappling with on off
medication different approaches and i
went off on a seven year journey to see
if i could find a more beautiful way oh
gosh it was from
my from 35 onwards okay yeah and by then
i mean your career you're smashing it
you're killing i mean there's so many
things that i left out of your intro
including being the editor of cosmo in
australia i mean this is like a string
of successes even though they're clearly
from reading your book there are times
where this was absolutely debilitating
but you're still able to to build a
pretty thriving life which is what i
want people to understand like there
there's a an interesting notion that you
bring to the table about basically you
don't i don't think you ever use these
words but being a high functioning
um anxious person yeah no definitely
use those words and i think um what i
wanted to do is just create a
conversation around not just living with
anxiety and these you know various
so-called disorders but thriving and
thriving because of them and throughout
history that was something that was
accepted to a certain extent so poets
scientists artists philosophers um the
greatest thinkers including wartime kind
of heroes politicians winston churchill
and so on
these people had bipolar an obsessive
compulsive disorder could not define
bipolar i think that's the one thing
that maybe the average person doesn't
have a complete grasp yeah
it's a it's a mood disorder that sees
you swing from mania through to
depression
sometimes in cycles as
tight as within a day sometimes over
several months and also the way that i
approach
my disorder and my interpretation of our
culture's understanding of mental
disorders it's a little bit like a
knotted ball of wool we have this
expectation that with some kind of drug
or some kind of right therapy we're
going to find that original thread and
unfurl it and we'll live a nice smooth
linear life right
no aspect of life is like that and when
you've got a
mental condition that means you're
particularly intense that ball of wool
is really knotted
and my aim in life is to loosen it up a
bit right and create more space and you
modulate certain aspects of your life so
that you can then
head off and hopefully find ways to use
it as what i call in the book and a
superpower i want to ask so it's a
pretty powerful
perspective maybe the right word to be
in the midst of this to have struggled
diagnosed officially with childhood
anxiety disorder to be diagnosed with
bipolar at 21 to like sort of diagnosis
after diagnosis it's it's very powerful
to be able to step back and say i'm
gonna intentionally change my
perspective
what gave you that insight was it you
talk about pain being very powerful in
the book was it like just sort of
hitting a pseudo rock bottom and saying
[__] this like something has to change
or well i think it was two things i was
well the main answer the meta answer is
i was rendered choiceless and that's
quite often how most humans make
dramatic change it's actually something
that has actually guided you to what i
call the cul-de-sac of your existence
and you get to that cul-de-sac and
you've got to make a decision um so at
34 i had quit my post as editor of cosmo
because i'd got hashimoto's and i was so
sick i couldn't walk for nine months
whoa yeah i was my head falling out i'd
put on i think is it equivalent of 40
pounds um in four or five weeks my nails
had sort of in four or five weeks
yeah yeah and you know remember i came
from a world of you know the red carpet
life and photos and all of that kind of
thing and defined in many ways by that
egoic stuff and then to become invisible
fat hairless nailless
no motivation no source of income
and it got to a point where i wasn't
able to leave the house i'd lost all my
motivation i was desperate i was just in
a state of desperation
because you don't know what the hell is
happening you're like i'm downward
spiraling or well let's go back to that
[__] of wool right i was i had
that thought and then i had the thought
of i should be doing better and i'm a
fighter you know leading up to this
point i was doing sand running races
24-hour mountain bike races i was
running to work and back every day i was
having three to four hours sleep a
bottle of red wine each night two
coffees in the morning and i had
hashimoto's disease at that stage and
and
interestingly talking about sort of
being rendered choiceless i did a story
commissioned a story um on infertility
and um what's called the egg timer test
which was a big thing back then a guitar
test ex-timer
was a test that young women could do to
see how many eggs they had left and how
much time they had before they were not
able to have children um it's since been
deemed highly inaccurate however i was
the only person in the office was who
was at the right time in their cycle to
do the goddamn test and so um
as life would have it i do this test and
they say hey listen we hate to tell you
but you are going through peri-menopause
and i was 34
you're never going to be able to have
children um something seriously is going
wrong with your hormones you need to get
this checked out
um
so i ignored that
test because you didn't like the answer
i did not like the answer
and so i ignored it for six months until
my health ran down to a point and
basically i had no thyroid hormones and
by the time i presented myself to a
specialist they said i was weeks away
from heart failure
so that's how
hard i went until i finally stopped and
i crashed so to answer your question the
first thing is my body stopped me for me
that's how i see it now tell me more so
what do you mean what what is the the um
hole that you're trying to fit into that
wasn't you the rat race the climbing the
corporate ladder
exactly it was that it was also that a
type concept that a-type construct that
women i think
in particular of my age my era
we very much were of that mindset where
we had to beat the boys and we had to
almost take on a masculine physicality a
masculine mindset
and i guess it really abrased my values
because i grew up on a subsistence
living property
i've got very anti-materialist values
always have you know as the editor of
cosmo and never owned a handbag
i rode a bike to work every day i
never owned a hairdryer
so
yeah i was regarded as as odd within the
building and that was okay for a while
and then it was you know revenue was
starting to fail was when magazines were
starting to suffer and all became
less about creating amazing content
as about satisfying advertisers and
that cycle has obviously tightened and
tightened and tightened around the world
now and i didn't think it was right and
there were things that i was having to
do and decisions i was having to make
that did not sit with my values
and fortunately i've got a mechanism an
internal mechanism that if i don't
listen to my values it explodes out of
me but yeah 34 after all this happened
the sickness
totally living in this space of being
redundant you know and invisible
oh i want to stop you this time yeah
what do you mean invisible
well
i was in the public eye and all of a
sudden
i was you know fat hairless
infertile and i was physically and and
actually invisible in the sense that i
was pretty much housebound okay and
midst all of this says life hasn't my
car was stolen my surfboard was stolen
my bike was stolen um
good run yeah it went on and on and to
the point where it became comical
and your friends drop off and
i think with chronic illness it's you
know very often said that um
at first you get a bit of love and
attention and then you know over time it
becomes
monotonous for people you know there's
no improvement um monotonous for
yourself
and
i just wasn't engaged with the world you
know so i was invisible in that sense
i wasn't down the street meeting
strangers and saying hello to the
barista who made my coffee because i
wasn't leaving the house
so
there was a moment where i'd been awake
for three days oh god
and i was lying on my bedroom floor
or what's going on well let's go back to
that ball of wool yeah analogy or even
just let's see yeah let's imagine just
all these thoughts are coming in and all
thoughts are coming out and when that
happens the net kind of
movement is zero i was numb i'd gone
into freeze mode i was manic i was
depressed i was stuck all at the same
time and it was just this kind of
frozenness
and i was i was lying on my bedroom
floor facing one of those
mirrored cupboard doors and
i could hear the kids upstairs um you
know going to school and i could hear
all the normal sounds of daily life
and i i was ready to check out i was
i was ready to die
and it's really calm about it and um
and i looked at myself in the mirror and
i couldn't see myself
like it was like this emptiness
and then this thought just dropped into
my head and it just said what if you
just kind of started again with just the
clothes on your back and did it your way
no one to bother you no one cares no
judgment because hey you're willing to
let go of everything so why not just
start with what you've what you've got
just here and let's see what happens and
that notion of an experiment let's see
what happens
became my motto for the next kind of
let's say well 10 years
and i literally got up
and
weird stuff started happening like just
bang bang bang because i honestly didn't
care i had nothing to lose and so i made
a commitment to myself that i would
remember that that's what i'd committed
to i would
start off again with just the clothes on
my back and i would live by my values
and i would promise never to get caught
up again
and that's what enabled me to go off and
explore things ring up his holiness the
dalai lama whoever it might be ask you
know and ask him questions um and i just
went and went and went and so first we
make the beast beautiful was an
exploration of how
you can do life differently without
getting caught up and being stuck in
that mold that square peg you know round
hole being a square peg
your ability to reframe i think is so
important right now as mental health
issues appear to be on the rise or some
debate
certainly it
the
the visibility of it the opportunity to
help people who are struggling with it
whether it's actually more people that
have it or not i think is irrelevant
being able to paint a new picture create
a new perspective
invite people to um
really experience their own life
completely differently because they
utterly change the frame i think is so
powerful and you you bring up an
interesting point there tom that there
is a little bit of conjecture as to
whether it is on the rise and it is i'm
one of those people that does question
it um so if we're talking uh what i call
everyday or fair enough anxiety um
that's on the rise so people just kind
of being angsty and and so on in terms
of disorders such as bipolar and
obsessive compulsive disorder
that's not necessarily on the increase
it's been around about 4. sorry 1.2 to
1.4 percent of the population around the
world throughout history
which suggests and i point this out in
the book that it's an evolutionary quirk
that's kind of within the human sort of
species to ensure our survival so that
we don't we're not all just kind of
lemmings following each other around the
planet hunting and gathering there's
some weirdos that go and invent the
wheel or penicillin or you know lead a
country to peace you know
some of our greatest thinkers talk to me
about anxiety as a driving force that
was something i found really yeah well
what i'd say is that if we go back
that's the disordered anxiety in terms
of everyday what i call fair enough
anxiety the fight or flight response
which is actually inherent to our
survival that is perceived as being on
the increase right because and this is i
have two theories for it um first of all
i think that the way we live our life
now emulates the anxious experience so
toggling between screens running between
activities being permanently distracted
um and feeling that we should be
distracted focusing is kind of not cool
you know learning
thoroughly is not cool reading a
newspaper article thoroughly is just not
what we do
um that emulates the same hormonal
response in the brain the fight or
flight response and so we are perceiving
that nexus life because um we are living
a lifestyle that that sort of creates
that hormonal response so there's that
aspect of things and also that a type
busy busy busy kind of uh notion is
revered you know how are you oh i'm so
busy you know well you know that means
you're on track
the second aspect of it is that we lack
resilience so i don't think we've got an
anxiety problem we've got a resilience
issue especially amongst young people so
we can't sit in our [__] long enough to
pass through it
and kind of find a way of coping you've
got to get vigilant you've got to get
focused you've got to take
responsibility
you know i refer to having anxiety
disorder as carrying a shallow bowl of
water around for the rest of your life
and you have to ensure it doesn't get
unstable
because it'll start to slosh and then
it'll get out of control and you'll end
up spilling water all over yourself and
loved ones and you've got to keep going
back to the source and starting again
and there's a responsibility that comes
with having this condition and that's
what i really try to instill in people
so how can anxiety be something that you
can actually use as a force of good
well
one way we can perceive it is to
understand the biology of it and how it
all works in the brain
and what's interesting is that
excitement and anxiety stimulate the
same chemical response in the brain
and so there's some techniques in the
book that i share where
when i'm anxious i often choose i
actually really go through a process of
choosing to see it as excitement and
quite often it is i think i've actually
heard you talk to somebody maybe sam
harris about this on one of your
podcasts it came up briefly it has
definitely come up i i
this i'm a little conflicted about this
and maybe because i'm bad and bad at it
yeah and i'm very open to trying to get
better
it is
anxiety for me is is like a
self-reinforcing
loop in the way that excitement is not
and so there's something to anxiety that
is far more sinister that's why i found
your book so interesting is it was the
first time where somebody said whoa whoa
whoa
there's actually elements of this that
can be very useful and
one thing that it made me think of is
this is going to be weird roll with me
first yeah i will always
kanye west now i don't know if he has
anxiety or not i'd be a little surprised
if he didn't have something approaching
mania at times and you talked about how
people that had this kind of disorder in
the past would
had at times in certain societies become
shamans and things where because it
allows them to
they're
ejected from the box they're they're
thinking so far out in like a different
realm and when i think about what i have
tried to cultivate one of the things i
had to learn as an entrepreneur was to
eject myself from the box to to be
outrageous to
to almost emulate things that from the
outside like one guy wrote a dm to me
and he's like hey bro i think that you
have your your manic depressive and he
was like i think that you you're prone
to mania i was like that's so
interesting
because i've had to train myself to be
able to do that to get outside the box
and so you look at somebody like kanye
west who lives outside of the box and
you start to see wow it is a
double-edged sword there's no question
yeah but in terms of breaking frameworks
in terms of like you said that
hashimoto's as terrifying as it is
actually
forced you out of a framework force you
out of a way of thinking left you in the
cul-de-sac of your life no choices
and so there is something really really
interesting so why do you why do you
dispute the notion that you can reframe
anxieties as excitement at times you
know as i said i will say this i think
it's amazing advice i will only give you
my limited
um experience having tried it and come
up wanting so
when i am really getting anxious there
there is it's a positive feedback loop
and you talk about this in the book i
laughed out loud when you say like being
afraid leads you to run and running
makes you feel better yeah with anxiety
it only seems to make you more anxious
and i was like yes that is exactly it
it's so [__] weird so the thing that
makes me anxious is anxiety yeah so i
can even get anxious just by being
around someone who's anxious because
that like reminds me being cold which
has the same physiological response for
me makes me anxious and then like once
the anxiety starts like it just [__]
snowballs and so my whole thing is i
need to interrupt that mode and it
may stem from
a it doesn't quite feel like framing but
it definitely stems from at least partly
the the fear right so i'm thinking oh
the anxiety is going to make me perform
worse and that's bad and then i'm worse
and so because i'm worse that's a reason
to worry and so like i get that that
there is very much a mental game yeah
but the mental game has always felt like
i need to interrupt the the positive
reinforcement well what you're saying is
that when you're anxious one of the
things about being anxious is very hard
to stop and actually say to yourself
okay let's calmly rethink this let's
reframe it as excitement it just doesn't
tend to happen and i totally get that
there's a couple of things in terms of
that notion of i mean the worst thing
about anxiety as you say is that we get
anxious about being anxious and then we
get anxious about being anxious about
being anxious and so on and so forth and
there doesn't seem to be an end point um
with hunger we can eat
most of our pain can be satiated with
something else with anxiety there
doesn't seem to be something that is the
end point that is the satiation point
and so on and we go so we do have to
make a we've got to create our own
endpoint one of the things that i found
that really resonated with people is
that there was a study that showed that
a panic attack for instance which is how
a lot of people experience anxiety
only ever lasts 20 to 30 minutes now if
you know this right just learning it
reading it in my book
you can actually
maybe not the first or the second time
but the third time you have a panic
attack and berate yourself and go on
that spiral
you can actually say yourself hang on
this is only going to last 20 or 30
minutes i can sit through this
i'm sure i can be resilient enough to
last 20 to 30 minutes of agony if i know
that i'll come out the other end and
we'll be all cool
so one of the selves that i mentioned in
the book is to read and learn and have
new conversations if we stay in this
notion of anxiety being a disorder and
that's the end of the story we're going
to stay anxious about being anxious
about being anxious looking for pills
outward fixes which as you know from my
book is part of the anxious condition
searching outwards when the salve is
about coming inwards doing the work to
come inwards our culture sends us out
ricochet outwards to pills self-help
books new gurus next next next right
that's anxious about being anxious about
being anxious you go and look for more
more more um
it's wrong way go back we've got to kind
of come back in and so it is practice
it's about reading having different
conversations
it's about also sheer years on the
planet and i really like um the stanford
address that steve jobs gave and i'm
sure you know it where he talked about
how you get old enough where you can
look back and join the dots
and you realize that all the things that
made no sense at the time
they all link up and they create a story
i mean he went and sat in a typography
class in the was it the early 90s or
late 80s made no sense at the time well
we all know it was kind of crucial right
um so
for me this is what i often say to young
people is just trust is going to lead
somewhere and so
sometimes that notion of being able to
sit and reframe things even in the
wildest of anxiety spirals
it is about just kind of over the years
reminding yourself reading more things
feeling what works
and going oh that's right
and i do think meditation as a
discipline as a as a practice for that
kind of thing that ability to stop find
a space between all the words and all
the stuff
to regroup refocus and be vigilant
is non-negotiable so there's there's
there's maintenance
so that you can modulate and then
there's stuff that you need to do when
you're in the wilderness of panics
it's a two it's a two-pronged approach
and that's how i live like my life talk
to me about meditation that that has
been the game changer for me and when i
think about the hardest things that i've
gone through in my life
thankfully they came after i learned how
to meditate and whoa when i think about
what that could have been like if i
didn't know how to at a physiological
level break the the spiral of anxiety
um
yeah it's not it's not good so
you've sort of tongue-in-cheek said that
you're a terrible meditator that will
resonate with so many people one walk
people through
um have you
improved and if you haven't why it's
still powerful
um okay so yes and knows my answer to
that one have i improved i've been
meditating for almost 10 years have i
improved no i'm still a crap meditator
however that is the beauty of meditation
the crappier you are at meditating the
more benefits you get why is that so
meditation as we know is a practice
there's no end point you know there's no
perfection to it um
what i feel is especially in our
contemporary culture
the real benefit of meditation and it
doesn't matter whether you're meditating
on a flame a mantra
you know your breath whatever it might
be
everybody within meditation is is
instructed to come back right come back
to the breath come back to the mantra
and i do a vedic style and
there's a
sanskrit word sukshima which means
effortlessly and innocently so you use
sukshma to gently come back and i sort
of
think of a sort of child that wanders
off and you just gently bring it back
and
off you thought your thoughts go off you
know you're a crap meditator you're
thinking about what you're going to eat
afterwards and what you want to do and
oh god this feels really great i'm going
to you know i'm going to write a blog
post about it whatever it might be
you gently come back
now if you're a great meditator okay in
your 20 or 30 minutes you might only
have to do that a handful of times when
you're a crap meditator you are
constantly gently coming back gently
coming back now within that 20 or 30
minutes it's pretty tedious
but what you're doing is you're
retraining synapses in your brain that
basically say
keep coming back keep coming back
wandering off come back
so you go out and get up and start the
rest of your day
you have
slowly over 10 years reprogrammed your
brain
to do that in the rest of your life
so i don't really care if i'm a crap
meditator i care about the impacts for
the rest of my life you know what it's
doing for me in the rest of the day
and the other thing is
i've had to do a massive
pivot
sort of a 180 degree turn in terms of
the way that i was approaching life
and meditation has been the best
wrestling pit you know me versus my ego
you know
sometimes my ego wins and sometimes the
lie big eye wins you know and um that is
a really important process to go through
and to be alive to and if you don't have
that as a daily
disciplined responsible
regime
i think it'd be almost impossible to
find a calm spot with your anxiety where
you can come to use it
and thrive with it but over the years
i've got looser with it i've felt that i
needed to individualize it so i bring in
some somatic theory and i do feel that a
lot of
healing and shifting can come from your
body what's somatic theory well it's to
do with your body um using different
aspects and feelings in your body we
hold so much emotion in different parts
of our body and this is an area that's
quite old but it's having a bit of a
revival at the moment and you mentioned
before the flight fight or freeze
response and animals often when they've
got that really primal fight or flight
thing going on it gets released because
they either run or they tear something
to shreds you know and survive
and there's a release for that kind of
cortisone or adrenal kind of surge which
is very very natural and then it all
drops off with so much of human anxiety
which
it you know it's kind of generally
involved in an office or a relationship
sitting on the couch you know we don't
have an outlet for it we're not allowed
to scream we're not allowed to bolt
we're not allowed to fight we've got to
bottle it up and so
animals and and presumably humans you
know back in caveman days we had an
opportunity to flee
um and that's why exercise is an amazing
cell for anxiety because it is an
opportunity to express
all of those hormones out get them
expressed so you don't do anxiety more
than once you get anxious but you don't
get anxious about being anxious about
being anxious you can break that cycle
so
exercise is an amazing self but um if
we're holding all of that in our body
it's being held somewhere and it sounds
particularly woowoo but there's quite a
bit of science now showing um that
therapy that can get you to focus on
those parts you've got in the pelvic
bowl is where
our running mechanism
and so much of what we do to defend
ourselves pivots from
uh so talk to me about the work so
meditation that's obviously a practice
that you can keep doing um what are some
other things that that you call the work
that people need to do take
responsibility obviously that's going to
be part of it
but how if somebody's watching this
right now and they're they're
fighting that fight they're in that
struggle but they haven't had that
moment of
reorienting and now going down the path
what do they do um another thing to do
is walk and again there's like
meditation there's a lot of science in
fact even more science i would say
around the benefits of just walking um
it can be done when you're in the middle
of a panic attack when you're in the
wilds of it but also as a modulating
sort of moderating lifestyle kind of
hack
what's really interesting is the part of
the brain that controls walking is the
same part of the brain that controls the
flight or flight response
and
walking essentially shuts down the
flight or fight response it really
modulates it so you don't have to go off
and do anything fancy just tie on your
shoes and walk out the door and i
remember being a teenager before i knew
the science behind it before i even
understood my own body properly
i knew that walking would fix it so i
had a post-it note on the back of my
door and i would it said just walk
and it's just my motto now
it's also why i hike i've hiked all my
life um and when i'm particularly manic
i will throw myself at a mountain
you know i just go and find you know a
six mile hike
preferably directly up a hill and i just
i just go for it and
it gets me
it gets me connected and it gets me
refocused and and i honestly that
anxiety will just drip away um so
walking is again another non-negotiable
not eating sugar
um yeah now i didn't answer that part of
the question which was right at the
beginning of the interview which is how
did i move from the sugar into this
space it's all interconnected
i actually started writing this book
when i first got unwell
i moved i lost everything moved up to a
a army shed in the forest in northern
new south wales um in a sort of a hippie
commune area
as you do
and um
and i started researching all of this
and i was writing a column for one of
the main newspapers and each week i
would do an experiment in wellness and
it was this week i dot dot dot met the
dalai lama um cried with brene brown
etc etc so one week
bereft of a topic
i quit sugar and hence that became the
name of the blog post the newspaper
column the book
and then the digital business
so the two projects were always
interconnected however i was on a
mission always to try to modulate and
find a more beautiful way to to manage
my life and to live a better life
and
quitting sugar had an immediate impact
on both my hashimoto's and my bipolar
immediate two weeks in two weeks
i noticed a discernible difference
and so i would say that's a
non-negotiable and look now many many
years later there was all this science
that was happening and gradually they
were showing the effects of sugar on
mental health and of course
mental health and sugar intake has
increased at the same rate same as
obesity diabetes the whole lot
interesting correlation is what the
sugar industry would like to call it um
so yeah now we see studies that show
there's a there's a clinic in in
switzerland that do
run a trial giving um some bipolar
patients
a tablet and the rest all they did was
take sugar out of their diet and
the latter group did a hell of a lot
better and what they found is there's a
connection between uric acid and and
bipolar and uric acid is is produced
when we eat too much sugar etc so
there's a lot of science happening in
that area but we also do know that that
it's not about a chemical imbalance in
the brain
it's more about gut health
crazy it is crazy how much the gut
impacts neurotransmitters
i heard you talk about serotonin
80 or more is stored in the gut the
first time i heard that i was like is
that a typo yeah like it is utterly
fascinating to me that and speaking
personally
six years ago i didn't even know what a
microbiome was i didn't know we had one
i had no concept of that whatsoever
and now realizing that it's like a
second brain essentially your your
enteric nervous system one there are
more neurons from your esophagus to your
anus than there are on a cat brain it's
insane to think that there are that many
um neurons just like you have in your
brain yeah in that space and then to
think that there are more cells in your
body that are bacterial viral
fungus than there are human cells by a
lot yeah um and that they can
communicate both ways is really that
whole notion of cutting the head off
from the rest of the body you know sort
of since descartes
um has dictated the whole way we see
mental illness and we're now unifying
the two and we're starting to really
question some of the science so that
whole chemical imbalance science by the
way in the last i think two to three
years has been completely debunked and
guess what guess who came out with that
science oh the first drug company to
prevent to provide a pill for anxiety
which by the way was in 19 i think the
late 70s a year or two before anxiety
entered the dsm
as a official disorder
so
these are all the questions we've got to
ask um sugar as well is as just as
controlled by various
you know influential groups and you've
got to ask robust questions about that
the great thing just to go back to some
of the stuff that people can do
is that it's all free
it's all free it's a bit hard
meditation like meditation is shitty
right but you just do it we all learn
we're a generation who learned to clean
our teeth twice a day and to wear seat
belts we got over it pretty quickly
right
there's a generation now that life to
get used to not carrying plastic bags
you get used to it you know humans are
pretty good like that so meditation
twice a day you just do it
non-negotiable walk one of the best
things you can do for your health
particularly mental health is to sell
your car a bit hard in that airline
interesting
so that people will walk so that you
walk i don't i haven't owned a car for
many many years i walk everywhere
absolutely everywhere and it's a mental
health strategy and it forces me to walk
um so walking um not eating sugar and
eating a whole food diet like and if you
want to know another really simple tip
in terms of wellness just learn to cook
um you know when you stop eating sugar
you stop eating processed food which
means you've then got to buy real food
which means that you've then got to cook
so just learn to cook
stop eating packaged foods it is a
silver bullet straight through to kind
of stable mental and physical well-being
these are not expensive things these are
things our grandparents used to do
um they kind of sound boring and really
unsexy because people want the thing
with the tm on it right
they and they want the person who's got
the five the five best hacks for such
and such
but really some of it some of what we
need to realize
about
where we need to head
politically spiritually physically
is that it might just be a bit more
ordinary than we used to
and that's a good and beautiful thing
which makes sense like when you think
about
just stripping things down to their
essence getting back to first principles
what what are the things that are
more likely to work
it's going to be physiological what i
call physiological hooks so we'll
meditation right is a physiological way
to interrupt like the thought patterns
and all that but using something that
evolutionarily we would have anyway
eating whole food whenever you can
getting you know things you can trace
back where it came from yeah and i will
say that i am
i am so sad that i miss the obviousness
of the first principles of this that
what your food ate matters
i just you couldn't have convinced me
that 10 years ago like it just seemed so
ridiculous to me yeah and
now
that seems so patently obvious when you
think about the fact that your cells
turn over every seven years some much
much faster than that
you're made of the things that you eat
and if you're made of the things that
you eat the things you eat are the made
of the things that it ate so it's like
or didn't eat how it was how it was
formulated in a lab somewhere by a
multinational company um with um you
know a vested interest in seeing you
addicted to their product yeah i mean
that's that's
that's the frightening thing and the
best thing you can do is stick it up the
system by cooking your own food and
don't buy stuff from packets
um
some of the other hacks that i think
people quite like and find helpful is
getting touched and this is a weird one
but i'm getting touched human touch so
if you're not in an intimate
relationship it can be difficult and
there's an anecdote i don't know if you
remember in the book where i was having
a panic spiral um i was in a shopping
mall
there was a running shop nearby and i
went in there and said i don't know what
size my feet are
and i said it because i knew he would
have to pull out one of those metal
sliding things you know those old
schools and he'd have to measure my foot
and he'd have to touch my feet and he'd
have to talk to me and that calmed me
down
i didn't buy the running shoes
i think i bought a pair of socks
actually um
but um
yeah i've had to do things like that or
i go and get a cheap thai massage
and then in between i do experiments
let's see let's see what happens so
when you're anxious everything annoys
you noises chewing noises
everything seems to just go wrong you
sit down the cafe you're really looking
forward to it it's a special thing it's
your one day off and the bloody tables
wobbling
you know and then a coffee comes out
spills everywhere it's cold and it's
just you know life sucks and um what i
do now is i go for the wobbly table and
i sit there with the air conditioning
unit dripping on top of me and
meditation teaches you that i meditate
outside each morning
i do exercise every morning that's
another tip is have a morning routine
the decision making making part of your
brain again is the same part that
modulates the flight or fight anxious
response and so if you have to make too
many decisions in a day it will actually
trigger anxiety anxiety and when you're
anxious you can't make decisions
um and so the less decisions you've got
to make in the morning
it frees up that that capacity and
prevents you from getting anxious um in
the rest of the day so yeah go to the
pain sit in it practice it and when
you're meditating sit there with flies
buzzing around you've got a leg cramp
you've got an itch
sit through it practice the resilience
um who's going to ask you like if you
have recommendations for people to
become more resilient is it as simple as
meditating when your nose itches like
crazy and not scratching it it's
absolutely as as simple and powerful as
that do you have other ones
um well going to the wobbliest table at
the cafe i think really works i have a
little thing in my head that says stay
stay so when i'm reading of course i
want to go and check instagram i want to
get up and just you know see
if somebody's emailed me i want to go
and ring somebody i've got one page
through one page
we can't focus on long reads anymore and
there's a part of our brain that's
really starting to suffer from that and
so i will practice reading and i have to
read a chapter before i go and check my
phone and i put my phone on the other
side of the room it's dumb stuff like
that but it works because we've got to
rewire our brain in different ways so
yes there's a whole bunch of resilience
like kind of techniques that i practice
and i experiment constantly you know i'm
a really bad swimmer i spend more energy
just trying to stay afloat
and that's why i do it
i live across the road from the beach
and sometimes i go down and go all right
well i go there i'll go the the pool
there's a pool at where i live which is
in the ocean ocean water that's you know
olympic sized pool
and that's easier
but
that's more exciting i see octopus and i
see you know stingrays sometimes i'll
see 20 stingrays you know um and
beautiful fish and
and so on and
sometimes i just want to go there but
i'll often
choose the harder thing just to see what
happens
yeah i think that's incredibly good
advice and what i love about what you're
saying is that i think a lot of people
think that to build their resilience
they have to do crazy [__] when in
reality it's it's pretty simple stuff
meditation i think is huge like if you
have an itch and not scratching it you'd
be surprised what that does cold showers
are big not wanting to do it but doing
it and staying in the water that the
notion of repeating stay that's really
strong i like that a lot
the gym is big so that i want to stop
this hurts my muscles are on fire
whatever and you keep going showing
yourself that you really can go a lot
farther than you think you can yeah
which is really really powerful yeah
and start where you are pima children
says that she's it's just a wonderful
concept wherever you are is an
opportunity to wake up or to practice
resilience or to stay longer
or whatever it might be wherever you are
and
i suppose that's how you know and that's
ordinary
but from the ordinary amazing things can
happen and apart from anything else it
gets you mindful
you know
all of these things get you mindful they
can seem draconian they can seem kind of
a bit rah-rah you know
but mostly it's about the the vigilance
that you apply while you're doing it it
really doesn't matter what you do
morning pages you know there's all kinds
of things going to the gym as you say
cold showers we see these fads coming in
and out but they all have the same
principle don't they and that is
vigilance applying yourself to something
that's just a little bit painful
yeah no i love that i love that
um
where can people find the book
um well it's pretty much anywhere first
we make the beast beautiful it's on
audible it's in on apple it's in
bookstores um around the country um and
you can also buy it via my website
sarahwilson.com as well amazing and
where should people connect with you if
they want to learn more no more say hi
well i do a lot of my stuff a lot of my
hiking experiences um on
my instagram which is well it's
underscore sarah was an underscore but
if you just put in sarah wilson it
should be in there with two little happy
feet at the end of my name beginning the
end of my name um that's probably the
best spot um and then sarah wilson.com
as well nice
what is one change
that you would have people make that
would have the biggest impact on their
health
look we've been talking about it a fair
bit i would say walking really and i
would say i'd go one step further i'd
say hiking in nature okay i think
there's a lot to be learned from from
going into nature and from what nature
can mirror back to us i think we anymore
i don't understand that
so i think a lot of the lessons that
we're seeking about connection and about
what life is meant to be about plays out
in a very still and present and awesome
way in nature
um
we we are
a species that responds incredibly well
to awesomeness you know
and
getting an overwhelming sense of how we
are both both small and therefore we can
back off a bit but then we're also part
of something
just infinitely enormous
that kind of juxtaposition that gets us
fired up that gets us truly connected
and motivated and inspired and
everywhere is metaphor
metaphor for what matters you know it's
just reflected right there um
you know the science on walking is
amplified when you do the walking in
nature so in japan they've got
a whole kind of wellness program that
the government funds uh called forest
therapy which is taken off here in the
states as well
south korea now um sends busloads of
their tech addicted children to forest
therapy camps um and the science on just
what these trees can emit and the impact
on endorphins and various other kind of
hormonal responses in the brain is
really substantial now and the other
principle behind that is while you're
hiking you're not consuming you're not
consuming technology you're not
consuming crappy food you're not
consuming
messages on billboards and you're not
consuming stuff you don't need in
shopping malls
and that is a recipe for
you know kind of infinite happiness
i love that
sarah thank you so much for being on the
show that was absolutely wonderful guys
trust me you're going to want to read
the book which is absolutely fantastic
everything that she puts out is a lot of
fun
and i think it is really really useful
especially now learning how to take
control of your own mental well-being is
one of the most powerful things you
could do and somebody that understands
how it relates to diet and all that just
doubles the impact all right if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential
you